Is a new golden age for the American worker around the corner?

For the last couple of years, workers’ median earnings have been rising on a sustained path not seen in years.

This may come as a surprise after decades of wage stagnation, when the good jobs of an earlier industrial era — in which workers could go straight from high school to a lifelong place on the factory floor, with a pension on the other end — have largely disappeared, replaced in many cases by work with little security, uncertain hours and few if any benefits.

Still, the wage picture is looking decidedly brighter. In 2008, in the midst of the recession, the average hourly pay of production and nonsupervisory workers tracked by the Bureau of Labor Statistics — those who toil at a cash register or on a shop floor — was 10 percent below its 1973 peak after accounting for inflation. Since then, wages have regained virtually all of that ground. Median wages for all full-time workers are rising at a pace last achieved in the dot-com boom at the end of the Clinton administration.

And with employers adding more than two million jobs a year, some economists suspect that American workers — after being pummeled by a furious mix of globalization and automation, strangled by monetary policy that has restrained economic activity in the name of low inflation, and slapped around by government hostility toward unions and labor regulations — may finally be in for a break.

But even as they forecast a brighter future for the working class, these economists also worry that the new age of tight labor markets and rising wages will create a different sort of challenge. As Alan B. Krueger, a Princeton University economist who was the chief economic adviser to President Barack Obama, put it, “We are heading for a labor shortage.”
Continue reading the main story
Related Coverage

    Bump in U.S. Incomes Doesn’t Erase 50 Years of Pain SEPT. 16, 2017
    Median U.S. Household Income Up for 2nd Straight Year SEPT. 12, 2017
    ECONOMIC TRENDS
    To Understand Rising Inequality, Consider the Janitors at Two Top Companies, Then and Now SEPT. 3, 2017
    ECONOMIC TRENDS
    The Job Market May Have Some Room to Run After All JULY 7, 2017

Economic Scene
A column by Eduardo Porter that explores the world’s most urgent economic challenges.

    Home Health Care: Shouldn’t It Be Work Worth Doing?
    AUG 29
    Labor Wants to Make Nafta Its Friend. Here’s the Problem.
    AUG 22
    It’s the Economy, Democrats, but Inequality Is Not the Issue
    AUG 15
    The Danger From Low-Skilled Immigrants: Not Having Them
    AUG 8
    The Tax Reform America Needs (and Probably Won’t Get)
    AUG 1

See More »

ADVERTISEMENT
Continue reading the main story

Mark Zandi, the chief economist at Moody’s Analytics, concurs. “Our problem going forward isn’t going to be unemployment,” he told me. “Over the next 20 to 25 years, a labor shortage is going to put a binding constraint on growth.”

Converging factors are at play, Mr. Zandi contended. The Federal Reserve is likely to allow the economy to run “on the hot side.” Years of exceptionally low inflation have finally convinced the Fed to drop its overriding anti-inflationary bias, forged in the high-inflation era of President Jimmy Carter, and to put more weight on the impact that high interest rates have on employment.

Manufacturing workers have probably already lost all the jobs to globalization that they were going to lose, Mr. Zandi said. Rather than “take” more American jobs, hundreds of millions of Chinese workers who have joined the global middle class over the last two decades will instead “create” jobs in the United States by buying American-made goods and services.

And even as demand for workers accelerates across the United States, employers must contend with the unflinching force of demography: a work force that is growing at its slowest pace in over a half-century, as baby boomers who joined the labor force from the 1960s to the 1980s now gradually age out of it.

More than seven years after the recession ended and the job market began to bounce back, only 60 percent of Americans over the age of 16 are working, about 2.5 percentage points fewer than just before the economy took a dive.

On average, Mr. Zandi pointed out, aging will slice about a quarter of a percentage point from the labor-force participation rate — the share of Americans either employed or looking for a job — over the next 10 years. By the end of that period, the labor force may even be shrinking.
